(dramatic music)
- [Voiceover] Asia and
Africa are both hosts
to several early
civilizations of the world.
They witnessed the
evolution of various species
as well as the
advancements of mankind
in the sciences, politics,
and, of course, agriculture.
Aside from being a
source of priceless
ancient knowledge
and traditions,
these two continents are
also known pioneer sources
of a very valuable
crop called millet.
It is believed that
millet was cultivated
and domesticated
in both continents
around the same time
during the Neolithic Era
around 7,000 to
10,000 years ago.
It then spread to Egypt where
it was grown in the Sahara
to India which is now
the world's top producer,
to Europe at the beginning
of the Common Era,
and to America in 1875.
Millet actually does not
refer to a specific plant.
It's a generic name
used to categorize
over 6,000 varieties, or species
of small seeded annual grasses
that grow around the world,
and are harvested for both human
and animal consumption.
Out of these 6,000 species
the widely cultivated are
Pennisetum Glaucum,
or pearl millet;
Panicum Miliaceum,
or proso millet;
Eleusine Coracana,
or finger millet;
and Setaria Italaca,
or foxtail millet.
Pearl millet is the most
commonly cultivated specie,
and is believed to have
originated in West Africa.
It's still grown in the
semi-arid regions of Africa
specifically from
Senegal to Somalia.
Pearl millet grows
up to 3 meters tall
with alternating leaves
that are up to 1.5 meters long.
Its grains vary in shape
as well as in color
like white, pale
yellow, brown gray,
blue, and purple.
It's resilient to
heat or drought,
but also thrives well in
areas where annual rainfall
ranges from 125 to
900 millimeters.
Foxtail millet is the second
most commonly produced millet,
and it's also
believed to be one of
the oldest cultivated
crops dating back
as far as 5,000
years ago in China.
It is tolerant to
varying types of soil,
higher altitudes, and
can be easily grown
in both temperate and
tropical climates.
It matures easily
around 65 to 90 days
especially in warm areas,
and it grows up to
one meter in height.
Proso millet also
called common millet
is believed to be
domesticated first
in Manchuria, China,
before it was introduced
to Europe about 3,000 years ago.
It matures easily
within 60 to 90 days,
and doesn't demand
too much water to grow
which makes it very adaptable
to the dry and high lands
of China and Russia.
In the United States, Russia,
and some South
American countries,
proso millet is primarily
used as livestock feed
and birdseed, and it's not
typically grown in Africa.
Finger millet is a
specie originating
from Ethiopia, and
was brought to India
4,000 years ago.
Like proso millet, it's
tolerant to the dry soils
of high elevations.
It actually thrives
well in high altitudes
in Uganda, Kenya,
Zaire, Tanzania,
Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe,
and even in the Himalayas
at 2,300 meters.
Its cultivation is primarily
for human consumption
especially to more than
25 countries in Africa
and Asia where it has
become a staple food.
Today, millet is the sixth
most important cereal crop
in the world, and
with its ability
to thrive in moistureless soils,
and withstand rough climates,
it might not just
be a suitable crop
in the largely
semi-arid African soil,
but also in many
parts of the world
that are gradually experiencing
warmer temperatures
brought about by climate change.
Whole grain's reputation
as healthy foods
is largely due to
their high protein
and fiber contents.
Many find it more
practical and efficient
to obtain their
protein requirements
from whole grains such as
millet rather than meat
because they get more
fiber too in the process.
Finger millet stands out
among the millet varieties
because of its
methionine content.
Methionine is one of the
eight essential amino acids
that the body cannot
synthesize on its own
so it must be included
in one's diet.
It's used to treat
certain liver disorders,
depression, allergies, asthma,
and even Parkinson's
Disease, and schizophrenia.
Also, together with Vitamin B,
methionine boosts the
body's sulphur levels
aiding tissue repair,
and promoting healthy
joint cartilage
for people with arthritis.
Like most grains,
millet's fiber content
is beneficial to
people who are at risk
of hypertension, heart
diseases, and diabetes.
Its insoluble fiber also reduces
excessive bile acid secretion
thus limiting one's chances
to develop gall stones.
Let's take a look at how
the nutrient profiles
of different millet
varieties fare
against wheat and rice.
First, let's take a look
at their fiber content.
Wheat has 2 grams,
while rice has only 1.
Now, the millet grains.
Finger millet has 3.6 grams.
Pearl millet has 2.
Foxtail has 6.7.
Proso has 5.2, and the
barnyard variety has
an impressive 13.6
grams of fiber.
Second, their calcium content.
Wheat has 30 milligrams,
and rice has 33 milligrams.
These are low in contrast to
pearl millet's 42 milligrams,
and finger millet's
staggering 344 milligrams.
Third, their
phosphorous content.
While wheat is leading
in phosphorous content
at 306 milligrams,
rice trails behind the
millet grains at 160.
Proso millet has 206 milligrams.
Finger millet has 283,
and foxtail millet is
packed with 290 milligrams.
Fourth, their iron content.
While some millet
varieties are at par
with wheat when
it comes to iron,
there are varieties that
are far more superior.
Wheat has 3.5 milligrams.
Rice only has 1.8,
while pearl millet
has 11 milligrams,
and barnyard millet
has 18.6 milligrams.
Millet grains are
also rich sources
of thiamine and niacin,
and are comparable
to wheat and rice.
Another fascinating
thing about millet
is its high
alkalinity which means
it can help the body
balance its acid levels,
and in the long run can
prevent osteoporosis.
How?
When the body's acid
level goes too high,
the bones release calcium
to bring it back
to normal levels.
Millet's alkaline properties
can prevent the bones
from releasing too much calcium
when the acid
levels become high.
Just a little reminder though,
millet contains goitrogen,
a substance that limits
the thyroid glands
from absorbing iodine
which can lead to goiter.
So just take caution
if millet is part
of your regular diet.
Unlike quinoa which
was almost forgotten,
millet has never lost
its value and relevance
all these years.
It may still be
known as birdseed,
but the increasing
interest of people
in plant-based
proteins bodes well
for the future of this grain.
Hailing from continents
of early civilizations,
millet has long
established itself
not just as a
staple food source,
but also as a
significant contributor
and player in
various traditions,
customs, and practices.
The Chinese revered
millet, and considered it
as one of their
five sacred grains.
Fan Sheng-Chih Shu,
a text from 2,800 BC
is the first document to mention
the five sacred grains.
There is no exact
list identifying
what these five grains are,
but in several
versions of the list,
millet was always included.
According to the list written
in the Classic of Rites,
one of the five
Confucian classics,
the five grains are
hemp, wheat, soy beans,
proso millet, and
foxtail millet.
In some lists, they
are soybeans, wheat,
broomcorn, hemp,
and foxtail millet.
In the epic poem "Hei'anzhuan",
they are rice, adzuki
beans, soybeans,
barley and wheat, and millet.
Houji was one of
the Chinese deities,
and was celebrated as
the God of Agriculture.
"Hou" in his name means
sovereign or Lord,
and "ji" means millet.
His name can be
literally translated
as Lord of millet.
According to stories,
Houji was responsible
for distributing grains,
and teaching people
how to cultivate them.
Every 15th of July, farmers
would hang bad grains
outside their houses,
and pray that Houji
would share more wisdom
on how they can
grow better crops.
In Hindu myths and legends,
millet grains and fields
were also often mentioned.
The grain which is
known as ragi in India
is closely associated with
the Hindu goddess, Kali.
During festivals
dedicated to Kali,
citizens of Tamil
Nadu in Southern India
would make a millet
porridge called Kuzl,
and would distribute
it for people to eat.
There are also
mentions of millet
in the chronicles of
Marco Polo's voyages
specifically how Kublai
Khan and his subjects
cultivated and consumed
millet regularly.
In the Hunza Valley
found in the Himalayas,
resides the Hunza
people called Hunzacuts
who are known to have
exceptionally long lives
up to 115 years old.
Because of this, many
have become interested
in the Hunzacuts diet
in hope of unlocking
their secret to longevity.
Aside from fruits and
vegetables which they eat raw,
the Hunzacuts basically consumed
what was abundant
in their region,
and that is grains
including millet
which grows efficiently
under the harsh weather
of the Himalayas.
Since millet production
is now scattered
across the globe,
different cultures
have come up with
their own versions
of millet breads, and porridges.
In India, Roti is
the most famous bread
made from millet.
The Indians also grind
millet to produce flour
which they mix with milk
and yogurt to make porridge.
In Sri Lanka, finger
millet is called kurakkan,
and they add coconut to
their version of Roti.
Millet is also boiled
in salted water
to make a dough called thalapa
which is eaten along
with meat curry.
In Vietnam, finger millet
has a very interesting
medicinal use.
Because of its high
calcium and iron content,
it is given to women
after they give birth
to help their body replenish
its calcium and iron levels.
Millet is also used
to make wine or beer.
In Taiwain, before
Taiwanese millet wines
were exported abroad,
it was primarily homemade
especially by the
Aboriginal tribes of Taiwan,
and used only during
special occasions
such as weddings.
Other alcoholic drinks
made from fermented millet
are Rakshi from Napal,
and Ajono from East Africa
which is drank using straws.
Millet's diverse influences
throughout history
only prove that
it's a powerhouse
of wonders and wisdom.
As the world
continues to evolve,
who knows what other wonders
will be discovered using millet.
Today, more and more
efforts to eradicate hunger
and malnutrition
around the globe
are being implemented.
International and
non-profit organizations
along with different
government agencies
are more proactive than ever
in researching and conducting
feasibility studies
to determine other
ways of improving
the world's nutrition.
The ancient grains
of millet are playing
a key role in these researches.
India and China are
the top two producers
of millet in the world.
Based on the 2010 data
of the International
Crops Research Institute
for the Semi-Arid Tropics,
India produced over 9
million metric tons,
and China follows
at 1.3 million.
India may be the
number one producer,
but ironically, the
country saw a decline
in production and
consumption of millet
these past years.
According to a report
presented in 2012
by Dawn Foundation,
the contributing factors
to this decline include
the lack of modern technologies
to ease production and
post-harvest processes,
the shifting preference
of the public
to rice and wheat,
and the overall minimal support
in promoting millet
as a health food.
While millet is
abundant in India,
it is, however, not
included in the government's
Public Distribution
System in the past years.
The Public Distribution
System, or PDS,
is a food security system
that subsidizes the
poor communities
with basic commodities
such as rice,
wheat, kerosene, and sugar.
Fortunately in 2013, the
National Food Security Bill
was signed into law,
and millet is finally
among the grain crops
to be distributed along
with wheat and rice.
Millet is also a
participant in various
biofortification projects.
Biofortification is
a process wherein
a crop's nutrients are enhanced
either through conventional
or modern breeding techniques.
Most crops are fortified
with iron, zinc,
and Vitamin A.
In a report published by
the Journal of Nutrition
in 2013, test subjects
from feeding programs
conducted in Africa and Asia,
absorbed two to
three times more iron
from iron biofortified
pearl millet
than from the regular millet.
The results are promising
especially in combating
iron deficiency and anemia
which contribute to
impaired mental development
among children, and
increase the risk
of mortality among
pregnant women
particularly in
developing countries.
Biofortification projects
are now being conducted
around the globe by
international research
and health organizations.
Traditional ways of cultivating
and enjoying millet will remain,
but consideration of
modern production methods
and applications of
the grain is necessary
to unleash millet's
other potentials
in nutrition and health.
The ancient grain millet
remains to be a staple food crop
especially for around 90 million
people in Africa and Asia.
Certain millet varieties
are widely made
into porridge,
flatbreads, pilafs,
cookies, and beverages.
Millet's taste
and texture varies
depending on the preparation
and cooking methods.
To enjoy a fluffy
and creamy texture,
simply cook millet
in boiling water
using the conventional
ratio one is to three;
one cup of millet to
three cups of liquid.
Cooking time ranges
from 20 to 30 minutes.
For a nuttier flavor,
first roast the grains
on a skillet over medium heat
until they're golden brown
before cooking them
in boiling water.
Always remember to
thoroughly rinse the grains
before cooking them.
Here are two recipes you can try
that will surely
excite your palate.
The first is Millet
with Spicy Tomato Soup.
For this recipe, you will
need one cup of millet,
one teaspoon of salt, and
three to four cups of water
to cook the millet.
While for the Tomato Soup,
you will need one kilogram
of chopped tomatoes,
one large chopped onion,
two dashes each of
ground cinnamon,
and ground cloves,
one teaspoon of ground cumin,
one-half teaspoon
of chili powder,
one-half teaspoon of
salt, black pepper,
two tablespoons of olive oil,
one tablespoon of chopped
fresh basil leaves,
and two tablespoons of
toasted pumpkin seeds.
Start by putting the salt
and water in a saucepan,
and cooking the millet
for 25 to 30 minutes.
Next, in a large skillet,
combine the chopped tomatoes,
chopped onion, ground
cinnamon, ground cloves,
ground cumin,
chili powder, salt,
black pepper, and olive oil.
Cook over medium heat
while stirring frequently
until everything is
soft, about 12 minutes.
Then to serve,
transfer the millet
to a serving bowl,
and simply pour
the tomato sauce on top.
Garnish with basil
and pumpkin seeds.
The second recipe is a fun snack
called Millet and Basil Patties.
Just prepare the following:
three-quarters cups
of foxtail millet,
one and three-quarters
cups of water,
one-half cup of chopped basil,
two cloves of grated garlic,
one medium chopped onion,
one-half cup of bread crumbs,
one-half cup of grated cheddar,
one-half teaspoon of
ground black pepper,
one teaspoon of salt,
and two tablespoons
of olive oil.
Boil the millet in the water.
When it's cooked,
transfer to a mixing bowl,
and then mash it with a spoon.
Once it's cooled, add all
the other ingredients,
and using your fingers mix well
until everything is
evenly incorporated.
Shape the mixture into
six to eight balls.
Flatten them using your palm.
Then fry the patties
in a hot non-stick pan.
Cook each side
until golden brown,
and then serve with
ketchup, or marinara sauce.
Some varieties of
millet are currently
just used as fodder and silage,
but hopefully further researches
in millet's
nutritional composition
will result in
increased market demand,
and human consumption
throughout the globe.
(dramatic music)